---
title: 'Evolutionary Grammar-Based Fuzzing'
date: 2020-08-01
permalink: /posts/2020/08/evoguzz/
excerpt: "Let's combine probabilistic grammar-based input generation with evolutionary optimization!"
tags:
  - evogfuzz
  - fuzzing
  - testing
---

💡 **Watch out!** This site is under Construction.
{: .notice--warning}

# EvoGFuzz: An Evolutionary Approach to Grammar-Based Fuzzing

**EvoGFuzz** stands for *evolutionary grammar-based fuzzing*. This approach leverages evolutionary optimization techniques to systematically explore the space of a program's potential inputs, with a particular emphasis on identifying inputs that could lead to exceptional behavior. With a user-defined objective, EvoGFuzz can adapt and refine the input generation strategy over time, making it a powerful tool for uncovering software defects and vulnerabilities.

Efficient detection of defects and vulnerabilities hinges on the ability to automatically generate program inputs that are both valid and diverse. One common strategy is to use grammars, which provide structured and syntactically correct inputs. This approach leads to the concept of grammar-based fuzzing, where fuzzing strategies are guided by the rules defined within the grammar.

A further enhancement to this concept is probabilistic grammar-based fuzzing, where competing grammar rules are associated with probabilities that guide their application. By carefully assigning and optimizing these probabilities, we gain considerable control over the nature of the generated inputs. This enables us to direct the fuzzing process towards specific areas of interest—for example, those functions that are deemed critical, have a higher propensity for failures, or have undergone recent modifications. 

In essence, EvoGFuzz represents a potent blend of evolutionary optimization and probabilistic grammar-based fuzzing, poised to reveal hidden defects and vulnerabilities in a targeted and efficient manner.

## Fuzzing a Program

Our program under investigation is `The Calculator`. This program acts as a typical calculator, capable of evaluating not just arithmetic expressions but also trigonometric functions, such as sine, cosine, and tangent. Furthermore, it also supports the calculation of the square root of a given number.

```python
import math

def calculator(inp: str) -> float:
    """
        A simple calculator function that can evaluate arithmetic expressions 
        and perform basic trigonometric functions and square root calculations.
    """
    return eval(
        str(inp), {"sqrt": math.sqrt, "sin": math.sin, "cos": math.cos, "tan": math.tan}
    )
```

**Side Note:** In the `calculator`, we use Python's `eval` function, which takes a string and evaluates it as a Python expression. We provide a dictionary as the second argument to eval, mapping names to corresponding mathematical functions. This enables us to use the function names directly within the input string. 

```python
# Evaluating the cosine of 2π
print(calculator('cos(6*3.141)'))
```
0.999993677717667

```python
# Calculating the square root of 36
print(calculator('sqrt(6*6)'))
```
6.0

Each of these calls to the calculator will evaluate the provided string as a mathematical expression, and print the result.

Now, to find new defects, we need to introduce an oracle that tells us if the error that is triggered is something we expect or a new/unkonwn defect. The `OracleResult` is an enum with two possible values, `NO_BUG` and `BUG`. `NO_BUG` donates a passing test case and `BUG` a failing one.

We import the `OracleResult` enumerated type from the `evogfuzz` library. This is used in the oracle function to indicate the outcome of executing the 'calculator' function with a given input.

```python
from evogfuzz.oracle import OracleResult
```

This is a function called **oracle**, which acts as an intermediary to handle and classify exceptions produced by the calculator function when given a certain input.

```python
# Make sure you use the OracleResult from the evogfuzz library
from evogfuzz.oracle import OracleResult

def oracle(inp: str):
    """
    This function serves as an oracle or intermediary that catches and handles exceptions 
    generated by the 'calculator' function. The oracle function is used in the context of fuzz testing.
    It aims to determine whether an input triggers a bug in the 'calculator' function.

    Args:
        inp (str): The input string to be passed to the 'calculator' function.

    Returns:
        OracleResult: An enumerated type 'OracleResult' indicating the outcome of the function execution.
            - OracleResult.NO_BUG: Returned if the calculator function executes without any exception or only with CalculatorSyntaxError
            - OracleResult.BUG: Returned if the calculator function raises a ValueError exception, indicating a potential bug.
    """
    try:
        calculator(inp)
    except ValueError as e:
        return OracleResult.BUG
    
    return OracleResult.NO_BUG
```

This **oracle** function is used in the context of fuzzing to determine the impact of various inputs on the program under test (in our case the _calculator_). When the calculator function behaves as expected (i.e., no exceptions occur), the **oracle** function returns `OracleResult.NO_BUG`. However, when the `calculator` function raises an unexpected exception, the **oracle** interprets this as a potential bug in the `calculator` and returns `OracleResult.BUG`.

We can see this in action by testing a few initial inputs:

```python
initial_inputs = ['sqrt(1)', 'cos(912)', 'tan(4)']

for inp in initial_inputs:
    print(inp.ljust(20), oracle(inp))
```

```
sqrt(1)              NO_BUG
cos(912)             NO_BUG
tan(4)               NO_BUG
```

The following code represents a simple context-free grammar for our calculator function. This grammar encompasses all the potential valid inputs to the calculator, which include mathematical expressions involving square roots, trigonometric functions, and integer and decimal numbers:

```python
from fuzzingbook.Grammars import Grammar, is_valid_grammar

CALCGRAMMAR: Grammar = {
    "<start>":
        ["<function>(<term>)"],

    "<function>":
        ["sqrt", "tan", "cos", "sin"],
    
    "<term>": ["-<value>", "<value>"], 
    
    "<value>":
        ["<integer>.<integer>",
         "<integer>"],

    "<integer>":
        ["<digit><integer>", "<digit>"],

    "<digit>":
        ["1", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7", "8", "9"]
}
    
assert is_valid_grammar(CALCGRAMMAR)
```

The defined grammar CALCGRAMMAR provides a structured blueprint for creating various inputs for our fuzz testing. Each rule in this grammar reflects a possible valid input that our calculator function can handle. By fuzzing based on this grammar, we can systematically explore the space of valid inputs to the calculator function.

### Leveraging EvoGFuzz to Unearth New Defects

We apply our `EvoGFuzz` class to carry out fuzz testing using evolutionary grammar-based fuzzing. This is aimed at uncovering potential defects in our 'calculator' function.

To initialize our EvoGFuzz instance, we require a grammar (in our case, `CALCGRAMMAR`), an oracle function, an initial set of inputs, a fitness function, and the number of iterations to be performed in the fuzzing process.

Upon creating the `EvoGFuzz` instance, we can execute the fuzzing process. The `fuzz()` method runs the fuzzing iterations, evolving the inputs based on our fitness function, and returns a collection of inputs that lead to exceptions in the 'calculator' function.

```python
from evogfuzz.evogfuzz_class import EvoGFuzz

epp = EvoGFuzz(
    grammar=CALCGRAMMAR,
    oracle=oracle,
    inputs=initial_inputs,
    iterations=20
)
```

Upon creating the `EvoGFuzz` instance, we can execute the fuzzing process. The `.fuzz()` method runs the fuzzing iterations, evolving the inputs based on our fitness function, and returns a collection of inputs that lead to exceptions in the 'calculator' function.

```python
found_exception_inputs = epp.fuzz()
print(f"EvoGFuzz found {len(found_exception_inputs)} bug-triggering inputs!")
```

```
EvoGFuzz found 646 bug-triggering inputs!
```

Lastly, we can examine the inputs that resulted in exceptions. This output can provide valuable insight into potential weaknesses in the 'calculator' function that need to be addressed.

```python
```


```python
```

```python
```


```python
```
